Bree: In 2005, our family moved from the conveniences
of the city to the open spaces of the country
[Music]
Our original plan was to build a large
home
Welcome to our courtyard. Here is our Earth Bag bedrooms, my family
and how our plans changed. We had talked about so many different
things we were going to do Like build a house
Gary: I wanted to put in a big house
Gary: We experimented with ideas of log and
steel
Shelly: But as we lived out here longer, we
started to meet some of the neighbors
Shelly: They were explaining living with alternative
building materials and living mortgage free
Shelly: This idea that we would have several
small structures
Shelly: The main house which isn't too much
of a main house.
It's just a one bedroom, one bathroom house
Shelly: And then build a bedroom for each
of the kids around the backyard to make a
courtyard
Gary: A house with outdoor halls
Shelly: We added lofts up into the house so
the kids would at least have a space to sleep
in until their rooms were built
Bree: When we finally settled on doing these
earth bag houses
Bree: I admit even half way through it, I
didn't think it was actually going to get
done
Bree: I was like, no, this can't be happening
Bree: Until I moved in, it was just like "Wow,
it's happening!"
Garen: When we were doing the floor, it was
me, Mom and Shae, I think, going through and
putting all the paper down
Garen: And Shae kept laying full squares of
pink down
Garen: For some reason she kept grabbing those
out
Garen: And they were all over the place
Shae: It's cute that you think that was an
accident
Shelly: What's interesting about a round room
is ...you know in your world, you step outside,
you're not in a square
Shae: It's really nice to have a break from
that.
It's easier on the eyes to walk into something
that is more naturally built
Shae: Then to walk into something that is
very rigid and perfect
Bryson: I wanted a deck on the top of the
room for stargazing.
Bryson: We went through a couple of designs
and then we figured out this crazy eight idea
Bryson: Where it would be the same amount
of square footage as all the other rooms but
it would also provide
Bryson: two separate areas for stuff to be
put in.
[music]
Bree: We're breaking ground on Bryson's Earth
Bag Bedroom
Bree: The first thing we need to decide is
where we're going to put it.
Gary: If you were to see it from the house
Gary: keeping with how this is swinging around
Shelly: Are you going to have to take the
laundry down?
Gary: Well, maybe not
Gary: If we move it over this way
Shelly: We could just put it in Bryson's room
and he could just automatically be the laundry guy.
Gary: I like it.
Bryson: I'm just going to lock my door.
Bree: This clothesline is set low so we could
help when we were small.
Shelly: Sometimes it's hard to have kids help
when their little 'cause it's just easier
to do it yourself
but it's really important to let them help
because it allows them to feel like a valuable
part of the family,
Shelly: But I guess we could raise it now
that you guys are taller
But I kinda got used to it being short.
Bree: The laundry lines are moved out of the
way.
The guys set a center stake and mark out a
circle.
Gary: Put your finger right there.
Tip it down, and hold it straight up and down
and walk.
Gary: Alright!
That's the inside.
Bree: Bryson's room will be made up of two
small circles, like a crazy eight.
Gary: Gonna put our trough in.
Bryson: We need a trench?
Gary: We need a trench.
Bryson: Alright.
Shelly: Okay Shae, I got our chart here.
The poles are 41 inches apart.
Shae: Alright.
Bree: We'll be using railroad ties for the
doorways.
Bryson: And then walk through here and then
we have a little walkway through here.
We'll have steps down and then we'll have
this room here.
[music]
Bree: The trench is cut in and leveled
Bryson: So, what we are doing is we picked
a spot which is our main level
We can see from right here if we pull this
up to the right level
We got about two inches to go
and this string will work its way all the
way around the entire loop
and we're taking these at about five foot
increments
so that when we lay down the bags, they will
all be level.
Bree: Once the posts are secure and the leveling
done, a threshhold is constructed.
Shae: Awwwwwww
Bree: One circle will be lower so Dad sets
up for the steps.
Gary: Come out here to 45 to here to a 45
'til we get a step.
Then I'll build another step in.
Five and a half inch risers and nine and a
half inch treads.
Bryson: We're putting cement in.
Shae: I'm balancing this.
There's absolutely no use to what I'm doing.
Gary: First time we have ever put steps in.
[music]
Bryson: Role this along, grab your bags off
Bryson: Fold them inside out.
Bree: We put down the first earth bag layer.
[music]
Bryson: Hang on, I'm retrieving my flip flop.
Shae: And then overtime they ask me to get
into a car, I'd be like, "Why?"
Bryson: Alright so we got a new tamper.
45 Buckaroonees.
Shelly: Wow, it works good.
Bryson: Really good.
Shae: [sing] na, na, na, ooohh oh
Bree: We're inviting some people over to help
with our earth bag building.
It's time to prepare.
Bree: First, easy access to damp dirt
Gary: Well, it's not like I forgot that Jeff
was coming over.
But, he was there early and I wasn't ready.
So, I jumped out of bed, 'cause he just knocked
on the door to get us some dirt for Bryson's
building.
Gary: We had laid out a circle for him to
be able to pull the dirt from.
Gary: What a time saver.
You know the difference between a huge bucket
on a tractor and a wheelbarrow and a shovel.
Gary: Ya, it will all level out just fine.
Gary: You did a great job.
Gary: It's amazing what you can get with a
few bucks and a case of beer.
Jeff: I go then.
Gary: I appreciate you.
Shelly: Thank you.
You are awesome.
Jeff: I'll go back and make sure my couch
didn't move anywhere.
Bree: Next, installing the electrical wire
and boxes.
Shelly: Shae and Bryson and I had a goal that
we would put in one layer of bags a day.
and get up, I don't know, it's like a couple
feet up to the point where the guys are going
to be putting the electrical.
[music]
Shelly: There were several evenings we decided
we would just wait 'til the sun went down
and we'd put up this big light and just went
ahead and working into the evening
Shelly: Are you guys out there?
I can't see you.
Bryson: Ah, yes
Shae: ooooohhhhhh
Shae: Our bag building just right down there.
It's really scary, the fire is just right
there
On a hill not too far from here
Shelly: We wanted to get the electrical in
prior to the group of people coming over
because we just didn't want to mess with that
when everybody was over.
Garen came in to help us.
Garen: What universe have we ever been like
everyone?
Gary: Go ahead and put these boxes in.
in strategic locations for the inside.
and one for the out.
Gary: We have to separate the wire with the
barbed wire that we use to hold the bags.
We're able to use these U shaped nails to
be able to separate the two wires.
Gary: The purpose is so we don't get an electrical
short.
Garen: It shorts out, it is going to be a
bummer.
Bree: The electric will be hooked up to the
nearby solar system
Shelly: The final step before the group of
people came over which is getting one layer
above the electrical.
They broke up in two groups.
Gary & Bryson and Shae & Garen.
They raced to see who could finish the circle
first.
Shelly: Oooohh, nice boots
Garen: Yeah!
Shelly: Ooooh, watch the nails!
Shae: They had a huge doorway in their bag
circle.
That they didn't have to bag.
Bryson: But you know they always have to have
the last word.
Mainly 'cause they don't want to loose any
of their "beefiness"
or whatever.
Shae: Are we doing okay?
Bryson: But we totally won.
Garen: We just like crushed you.
Bryson: We beat 'em like nobodies business
Shae: Oh, we definitely won.
We creamed them.
Bree: We need several cleats.
Gary: We have three different types of cleats
that we use.
We have the simple cleat
that fits inside of the two bags.
Then we have another cleat
That fits up against a window.
Then we have a third kind that we use.
They have kinda an L shape.
Shae: We made over 40 cleats.
I can make mine really fast but Bryson
he put like a bazillion nails in there.
Bryson: And then when your done putting nails
on this side, you flip it over so the nails
stick up like this
Bryson: When you're doing the cleats, you
can put like 5 nails in it or like 20
and I was just putting mine in and I had them
beautifully
Nice.
In a row.
Everything symmetrical, perfect.
And Shae was just bam, bam, bam, done.
Bam, bam, bam, done.
Shae: 21 left.
Shelly: Wow.
Bree: 2x12 Window Frames are also needed.
Gary: Found on craigslist a couple of great,
brand new windows
a 4x3 and a 2x2.
Cost us $120 for both windows.
Bryson: Windows, you know.
Bryson: We'll be using these for the steps
and window frames.
2x12s and 2x10s
Gary: The size of a window is static, meaning
it's usually a half of inch shorter
so that it will set inside of a window frame.
In our case, we could just make the frames
3x5, 3x4 and so on
Gary: I use three 2x6s and just nailed them
together as a big header.
Shae: Why do these things have to be together?
Gary: These are headers that go above the
window.
Help support the weight of the roof.
So that we're not putting the weight of the
roof over the top of the window itself.
Bree: Steps are next.
Gary: Okay, these are the threads for our
stairs
2x10s
They'll be nine and a half treads.
Here, come with me.
I'll show you how it goes on.
It will all go up
every two rows
we're gonna have one step coming up
and a circle going all the way up to there.
Gary: Inside the walls, we of course ran nails
up and ran nails down, similar to how we do
our cleats.
We chose to bring that out and let it just
kinda free hang
and maybe just a small, temporary post underneath
of it.
Shelly: We also are gonna have bottles prepared.
We're gonna put in little bottle windows as
the steps go up
Bree: Lastly, a center pole is placed for
measuring.
Gary: We place a pole in the center of the
building
An inch and a half pipe that runs completely
up about 9, 10 feet
Now, we have a nice pole that runs through
the center of the building
to be able to gauge the circular bags as they
go around.
Bree: The lightning storms are bringing additional
challenges.
Bryson: This is what happens when it gets
too wet.
Water starts bubbling up
the sides and it gets really slushy
like you can't bag on top of that.
It's jello.
Gary:If that doesn't dry out, we're going
to be in trouble.
Bryson: My awesome room.
Dah Dah Dah!
You can see Dad by it.
We put in the arch
We're going to put up that arch there.
We put in one step to
go up
to the top of that
Bree: Our friends arrive to help build Bryson's
building.
However, immediately, we experience a problem.
A storm hits the night before dropping two
inches of rain.
Bree: So Dad, what happened?
Gary: We had a 2 inch rain and soaked our
bags
Gary: Trying to maneuver them around a little
bit
and we end up with half the wall collapses
on one side.
So we have to tear that all down.
We have to go back to the foundation.
and we have to start over.
Bryson: Restarting at the foundation was a
little discouraging.
Bree: But the other one, the other circle's
okay Dad?
Gary: Yeah, the other circle is okay.
Gary: So we start bagging as fast as we can
so when people show up
there's something to do when they get here.
I think the night before, if there's a chance
of rain, we're definitely going to put tarps
on.
Bree: I had this ingenious plan to split everyone
up in teams.
However, there's no way to evenly divide
the work because the layers have to go up
in sync.
But, that's our little secret.
Green Team mascot
Shelly: Wow, lots of enthusiasm.
Bryson: Oh yeah.
Shae: Our friends, Esther, Andrew, Deborah
and Peter came over to help us.
It was so much fun to work with them.
Bree: Faster than the speed of nature.
If there is a speed in nature.
Shelly: Do you know how slow nature is?
Andrew: It's too slow that's what it is.
Garen: We are the strength of the ocean.
Bree: That's right.
Shelly: Our favorite thing about building
with earth bags is that all ages can participate
Bree: Hello, coming in at ...we don't know.
and team Blue
Bryson: We are going to win.
Bree: Are you feeling it?
And then my, my home team right here.
The Green
Shelly: Are you guys the Yellow team?
Yeah, but what do we get Mom?
Shelly: It's a sign.
Bree: Hello, little bug.
Bree: We need to reinstall the electric
Shae: Esther and I ducted tape the wheelbarrow
wheel and it surprising worked for quite some
time.
Shelly: We used our arms to measure how long
we wanted the bags.
About 3 arms length.
and we straighten out the barbed wire as much
as we can.
Our friend, Jackie helped me out.
We cut it in sections using bolt cutters and
then it was laid between the bags.
Bree: The barbed wire springs into action
and Jackie is in the line of fire.
Gary: Some of my buddies from work showed
up
We had Scott, Alex, their son.
Malcom was here
Bree: Then our hero, Tom, shows up with Pizza!
Bree: After lunch we fixed the wall that had
fallen and were ready to go higher.
Gary: Everything wasn't that so bad with all
that rain.
All that dirt now was a bit damp.
That made packing the new stuff a lot easier.
Shelly: It was pretty exciting to see that
first window frame coming in to be placed.
Bree: Whatcha doing Mom?
Shelly: I am putting in the bottle lights
for the steps.
Bryson: Hello Camera.
Gary: How are you doing Rick?
I tell you, he really is a trooper.
He came over and jumped up on that wall
and just started working hard so thanks Rick!
Gary: You haven't fallen off yet?
Rick: No vertigo.
Shelly: Is that rain?
Bree: Over here you can see a storm is threatening
But over here it's blue sky so you never know
if we are going to get hit or not
Gary: Some of us are desk job people.
We are starting to slow down.
Bree: We are over waist high in bags, 3 window
frames are installed along with 4 steps.
Bree: Having friends over to help build the
earth bag walls is a real boost.
We're half way to the top
Let's take a look at the cost so far.
Shelly: We are continuing our one layer a
day
and as we get higher, we'll have to back that
down to about a half layer a day.
Gary: We stayed pretty diligent on maintaining
the distance from the center pole
to the outside of the building.This is going
to really help us when we get to the roof
at the very top.
Bryson: Okay, so we're not nailing the cleats
in those until we get a little bit high
so we can level the windows.
Gary: That's a little different than we normally
do.
We normally nail those cleats in as we're
going up.
This time we're gonna wait until after done
with the roof.
Bryson: And the building has to settle to.
Shelly: On the bags, we cut out about say
a 15 foot length or so and then we turn them
inside out.
and then we have to be careful that as we
lay them, the seams don't match up at the
same places.
Bryson: Our new addition to our farm.
Shelly: After the kids get settled in their
bedrooms, they get a pet.
Garen's dog, Diesel, he just gets so excited.
Shae: He's a little black lab and he's so
playful.
He gets into all the bags when we're trying
to work.
Shelly: Aw.
Rolly.
Shelly: Are you helping?
Shelly: The puppy is pooped.
Bryson: Play with the bag, a minute later,
out.
Bryson: Look how solid these things are.
Amazing.
Bryson: Point them to the center pole
and we do every 2 bags
Just enough for like one person you know.
Like a normal step is longer.
We cut it down in size.
so it wouldn't take up most of the room
Gary: We're using cleats inside the walls
for hanging pictures
Shelly: It's really hard to know exactly where
gonna put those pictures so we put them everywhere.
Bryson: I tuck the end like a paper airplane
and then I'll step on that, curl it up and
lay it on my leg.
As they load in dirt, I just let it down.
And then at the end, I'll fold it and set
it down.
Shelly: We put 2 quart jars together and then
we tape them down with duct tape so they don't
move around.
until we get the bags laid over the top
The jars will now create this natural lighting
for each step.
Shelly: I wonder if we are going to run out
of barbs.
Shae: We ended up using around a roll and
a half of barbed wire.
Shae: Wear jeans, it's advised.
Shae: Probably $70 a roll.
Shelly: Second roll.
Bryson: We had to cover the bag building up
from the rain.
'cause it was making it soggy.
Gary: After the last problem with the rain,
we tarp every time when we figure it's going
to start raining.
Gary: With the header, we level both sides
so we get a nice box around the frame.
Bryson: Are we going to lay a bag over the
top of this?
Gary: Several bags actually.
Shelly: This is another place we added candy
jars so that some of the morning light can
come through.
Shae: And wave them in the air like you just
don't care.
Shelly: As we get higher, we start to need
more help to move that dirt up to the top.
Bree got in there and helped us out.
Bree: My dog, Max, came out and helped us
out while we were working
He went out on the top of the earth bags with
us
Bree: When your acrobats get you into places
you don't want to be.
Shelly: Oh, he passed the steps again.
Bree: Oh, now I'm really scared.
But I ended up having to go out and save him
because he couldn't get back down.
It wasn't as if there were stairs or anything.
Bree: Hold onto your hats, 'cause it's about
to get one.
Gary: Because we have a circle, I wanted to
put I wanted to put a design on top of it
the roof that's somewhat circular.
So we laid our joists on 2 foot centers, like
your would a normal patio roof.
Gary: We have 20 footers for the longest sections
in the circle.
Gary: Our jig that we are going to use
The joists will run in this direction here
for the rafters on the roof for that flat
roof.
and then we can adjust them up and down and
then cleat them in.
on both sides and then when the bags lean
up against them, that will give them lateral
strength this way.
and then these get all pinned in on the top
of the bags.
Gary: We have straight lines running north
and south
and then we needed to have joists that go
out perpendicular to the outside
put on there with joist hangers to help support
the weight.
and then there were these little jacks that
went off on a 45 from that.
Shelly: So just when we think we are done
bagging, we still have a little bit more bagging
to do
in between each of the rafters.
The alternative to bagging is cobbing and
that is not any fun to try to fill it with
cob.
Bryson: 50 pound tamp
Shelly: Oh yeah, it's beautiful
Bryson: And this entire area out here is all
going to be the top decking.
Gary: Since it's a deck we are going to be
walking on
I wanted like a 3/4 inch material or 7/8 material
Gary: I need to do 2 bisections.
Shelly: Gary can be working away and he just
seems to know
when it's time to slow down and teach the
kids something.
Gary: Two things, a square corner and bisecting,
you can split this up
into as many segments as you want to that
are all equal.
Gary: Pull up the plywood a little bit so
we can make our cuts
put our facia board on
re-attach the plywood
and we have a segmented roof up here that
almost looks circular
that's good
Bryson: Put telescope stuff on there and even
a bed maybe so we can sleep up there.
Gary: As usual, we're trying something new.
I'm not used to a roofing material that isn't
like, asphalt or steel
We went to a professional roofer
and he suggested we us the 30 pound felt
and 3 coats of snow roof.
Bryson: Here's what we're doing.
We are taking this microfiber and we're laying
over
the creases and we're covering it with the
white roof coat.
We ended up doing like 3 or 4 coats on there.
Shelly: The expenses are low until we get
to the roofing.
That's when the cost starts to really add
up.
Bree: The front half of
the building takes a creative shape
Gary: It's more conical.
Kind of a tilted cone
to give enough room for the inside to have
stairs.
they run up alongside and a door that goes
out to the flat roof.
Bryson: These go up there
for the door.
Gary: The door requires 2 posts be installed
on top of the flat roof.
Bryson: This is really how high we gotta go
all the way
Gary: Then we can run the bags along the sides
right up to those posts.
There are now tall bags on one side of the
roof
and shorter bags on the other because we're
stair stepping them up
to allow for the cone shaped roof.
Bryson: We old tent poles
and double barbed
to help strengthen the walls when they get
really high.
The platform is right at the top of the stairs
so that we can open up a door up there
and get out onto the main deck outside.
Gary: It just glues it right on there so we
don't
have any problem with squeaking.
Bryson: We use the same type of cleat system
that we used on the other roof.
Gary: We choose one of the door posts
at the top of the other room to be kinda a
center post.
Bryson: Before we put the plywood on we're
going to
have to bag up all around the outside edges
so that it's flush with the plywood.
Booyah!
We're closing in on the last little bit here
in the very, very corner.
It's right there and bagged all the way across
here.
and it makes it really nice.
It closes in the whole section.
It's pretty cool.
The last bag we will probably ever put up.
Right there.
Gary: Bryson and I go brain dead.
trying to get this facia on the outside
of this cone shaped roof.
There's a lot of compound angles
and I'm making calculations errors.
I got 2 facia boards up and we had to quit.
Garen notices how frustrated I was
and feels sorry for me
so the next day, he's out there helping.
He's helped us with the angles and bevels
up here
and its made a great difference this morning.
Bryson: If it wasn't for him we'd all be doomed.
Bryson: The
sheeting up there
is like a puzzle.
It's so unique that we have to cut all these
odd angles
and we're doing angles, you know, when you
have an
angle this way and you have an angle that
way.
Anyway, these weird angles we keep cutting
and phew, those are hard to figure out.
Bree: We bought the wood for conical roof
frame all in one shot.
The cost?
Gary: We're putting up a 6x6 porch
Bryson: We got some posts instead of going
down
to the forest and chopping them down
we bought them at the store.
There really straight
Gary: Unlike Bree's right?
Bree has these skinny little things, there
real strong.
It's all mesquite wood but it's just a totally
different look.
Next thing we do is get all the trim around
the edges.
The metal rain drip trim
and then finish paper, then we're ready for
the Ondura.
Bryson: We went with the Ondura 'cause it's
not as difficult to cut.
It's suppose to last really long.
Right now its
been up to a about a year on Garens' room.
And it seems to look the same as when we first
put it on, actually.
Gary: No fading
Bryson: Yeah, no fading at all.
Gary: So the product seems to be pretty solid.
We're still not sure.
Shelly: That's an interesting way to hammer.
Gary: Painful, to watch.
Bryson: Bam, bam, bam, done.
Shae: While the guys worn the roof, me and
Mom
decided to start with the stucco.
Gary: To prepare for the gals going around
the corner
there with the stucco.
We need to have the windows complete
so they can bring the stucco right up next
to the trim.
Gary: We built these particular frames where
they are
not attached to the bags or the header
Bryson: We're not going to do these windows
loose any more I don't think.
Gary: No, we're not doing them loose anymore.
Shae: They have the windows framed so we're
going
to start stuccoing at least one of these circles.
We've decided on stucco because it holds up
better in the rain.
Shelly: Bryson was up tamping 2 rows up from
the glass
and to our shock, it cracked.
Bree: I've found what we should put in there.
Shelly: Oh my goodness.
Shae: That's way too big.
Shelly: We'll make it work.
Shelly: Perfect fit.
Bree: Look at that.
Shelly: It's a perfect fit.
Bree: How are we going to get that in there?
Bryson: Wearing my glasses for protection
of her eyes.
Shelly: I got eye protection.
I got "Bry" protections.
Shae: It feels like the stucco goes really,
really slow.
Shelly: But we have been plugging away every
day
we do, you know, a couple batches
Shae: I keep getting dropped on.
Shelly: Part of educating our kids is to spend
about
an hour a day doing some sort of physical
work.
Gary: You know it's really important to have
the kids complete something.
There's nothing like finishing a project and
having that sense of accomplishment.
Shelly: One of the benefits of the earth bag
buildings
is that when they get done, they get a bedroom.
Shae: We started looking back it and
it looks like we've gone like super far
so obviously now that we're in the lead,
we're gonna make it a game and beat the boys.
Shelly:Yep.
Gary: The idea that the ladies can beat us
is a little unusual because we're really good
and very fast.
And the Ondura goes up real quick.
Bryson: And we can hammer those nails like
nobodies business.
Bam, done.
Gary: However, just to make them feel better,
we ran out of materials.
Bryson: Yeah.
Garen: We can really slow them down Bryson
is not
to get the door done.
Bryson: Oh, because they can't cob around
the door
'til we're done.
Bree: Mom and Shae are racing to get the stucco
up
before Dad and Bryson can finish the door
and roof.
but, before they can get out there
the weather takes a turn for the worst.
Shelly: Ut oh Shae, this may put a damper
on our victory dance.
Bree: Meanwhile Bryson and Dad are working
inside.
Bryson: We got a really good deal on a wooden
door.
Gary: We only paid about $75 bucks for the
door on craigslist.
Bryson: My friend Andrew came over and he
helped out.
Bryson: I'm gonna spray paint these bolts
so they are black.
And stick them in the holes,
tighten them down, grind the tips off.
The door had 48 bolts
and nuts
and washers.
Bryson: There's a lot of washers.
Gary: I had to build a frame for it.
Bryson: Dad, it looks like you cut it right.
Gary: Oh, well amazing that.
Gary: Then assemble the door to the frame.
Which means cutting in the joints for the
hinges and
and do some dado cuts
and relieving, chiseling
and then set the door inside there.
Shae: We used cob for Bree's room
but cob requires a roof protection
Shelly: And also some sort of way of protecting
it
linseed oil or paint
Shae: We decided to use stucco which doesn't
wash away in the rain
My friend, Esther,
Esther: Hi
Shae: Was so much fun to have her over here.
Shae: You do it, I'll watch.
I'm just going to have to invite her every
time.
Bree: We use 10 or so bags of cement.
Bree: The gals are the clear winners
'cause the the ridge caps for the roof won't
arrive until next week.
Gary: We'd like to NOT admit that the ladies
beat us because
Bryson: Oh they didn't beat us
Gary: That's not even fair.
We didn't have all our stuff.
It's still on order.
Bryson: We didn't have all our materials.
Shelly: Hey, but we won.
Shae: We did win.
Garen: The reason they lost was because Garen
was not there.
Shae: Oh Sure.
Bree: Since we now know the roofing cost.
Gary: This isn't the door we're going to be
installing but
we are going to be using this as a model.
The door up above is a slanted door at the
top.
Bryson: We used 7 2x6 tongue and groove and
we
glued them together to make the door.
Bryson: if I got up, this thing would go whoop.
Bryson:We used bolts to hold all the tongue
and groove boards together.
Gary: Originally we had decided we wanted
a round
window.
Two half windows as one.
But we discovered that the width of the windows
was
just too much to take out of the center of
the door.
We'll go ahead and slide the windows this
way
and then turn it like this so that we have
less of a width and we have enough room for
the handle.
Bryson: Following the line to cut it out.
We're using that tool to do it.
So we pre-drilled the hole there
and are able to stick our blade in.
Make sure the hole is on the inside of the
line too.
From there we are able to cut around the whole
thing.
Bryson: So let's go ahead and put it in.
Gary: We're going to be using Butyl rubber
and this is a typical window sealant.
Instead of finding ways to clamp this into
the window
or screw it into the window like you would
typically do.
We're going to actually glue this little puppy
in
here with this Butyl rubber.
Shelly: Did you notice Bryson is not with
us?
Gary: Decided to go off and go skiing
Bryson: I love you guys!
Gary: While it's drying, I devised a quick
and easy
system here.
I'll do this on both sides.
Then I can flip the door over and work on
the other side.
Gary: We hope that Bryson
and the crew had a great time skiing.
Bryson: The door turned out a lot better than
what I thought it was going to be.
Bryson: It fits!
Bryson: It acts almost like a skylight too
with the window
and so it lights the room real nice and stuff.
It's really, really cool.
Bree: We prepare to paint the exterior.
Shelly: Before we start painting, Bryson moves
the dirt away from the building.
And then we start taping everything off.
Windows, doors, bottle lights.
Bryson: I'm gonna go ahead and go around and
seal all the cracks up above with this foam.
Shelly: This paint is suppose to be one of
the best paints.
It's got UV protection and it's suppose to
be one coat
over the stucco.
Which is going to be interesting to see if
it really is.
It was a lot of money.
A little over $200
which is way more than we normally pay for
paint.
We usually get the recycle paints and pay
$10.
Gary: We chose to do a different method of
painting this time around.
Typically, in the past we've used rollers
and it's taken us several days to work on
it.
We own an airless sprayer.
The advantages to having the airless sprayer,
is
of course the biggest one, is time.
Gary: Now, let's try the other bit.
Gary: I hadn't used this thing in years
so we had to get it in, get it cleaned up
take it apart, oil it
We had things things all set up, flipped the
switch.
Nothing happened.
Bryson takes his multimeter out
has everything all hooked up.
Says, it's the switch.
So he went ahead replaced the switch with
a little wall socket switch that you have
at your house.
Bryson: Shut if off.
Drum roll please.
Gary: Oh yeah.
Bryson: Okay.
Gary: When the boys were young, I was really
involved in their problem solving but Bryson
no longer needs my help.
He really enjoys working with anything electronic.
I just back away and let him do it.
Gary: I forgot how to use the sprayer.
So I gave the neighbor a call.
He gave me some quick instructions.
We got it primed right.
Gary: Okay, thank-you.
Gary: Do you think we're ready Bry?
Bryson: Gotta get the water out of it now.
Bryson: It's a brown.
Gary: Beautiful.
Gary: Alright, your going up.
Bryson: It was my job to paint.
Gary: The spray patterns and working with
how to spray
Bryson and I worked together and we got that
all figured out.
Eliminating a lot of the overspray
Conserving our paint.
Bryson: It was challenging to get up onto
those eves
but after awhile I got used to it.
Gary: Painting in the little corners and edges
takes a lot of time.
With an airless sprayer.
Got it right away.
Bree: I just want to show you this light switch.
This light switch proves My Little Homestead
was a part.
This is our signature move.
We always put a light switch on electronics.
Anything we can't get to turn on, it gets
a light switch.
Bree: And it's the Garenster's job now.
Bryson: Show off.
Bryson: Garen jumped in there and helped me
out.
He always works really fast so it's like,
Oh Yeah.
Bryson: Alright, I think I got it.
Bree: Pretty slick huh?
Bryson: Yeah.
Gary: Cause it's kinda a thinner paint
so it went through that machine just perfectly.
Bree: An hour to paint the entire building.
So how do you think it went Dad?
Gary: What's that?
Bree: How do you think it went?
Gary: Oh gosh this is the only way to do this.
Absolutely, It was great.
Shelly: There was probably about 2 inches
on the bottom of the bucket
so it did make it.
It painted the whole thing including the eves.
And it's, it's a nice coat.
Shae: The majority of the painting is done
so now it's onto painting the trim
which is us girls job.
We're using this brownish, purple color
'cause it's what we have.
And it's not going to cost anything.
The guys will be working on
the trim around the door and the trim around
the patio.
Shelly: Finishing up the trim guys?
The last of it?
Gary: The last of
the trim.
Bree: The guys head inside to begin the soil
cement subfloor.
Bryson: Soil cement is easy.
It's easier than laying normal cement.
And cheaper.
Gary: It's kinda like dry pour with a fence
post.
You know, you just pour your cement in, pour
some water in
and shazzam.
Bryson: Bam, it's done.
The whole floor.
Gary: We have everything out of here right
now.
Bryson: We level out the floor.
Gary: So we can begin to level this floor
We want to level it about 3/4 inch down.
We're a little bit low on the backside so
we had to bring in some dirt
in to level it.
Bryson: Diesel has been a big help
Gary:Sure.
Shelly: He has?
Gary: Oh yeah, he's a wet dog.
Bryson: He's been breaking up the dirt for
me.
He was digging holes and it was making all
the dirt loose so I could scoop it.
Bryson: Good Boy.
Gary: Think how many muscles we are building.
Shelly: Yeah.
Gary: Yeah.
Bryson: Better than working out.
Shelly: Were you thinking about working out?
Lifting weights?
Bryson: No.
Why would I?
I'm doing this.
Shelly: Wow, Gary.
Okay, I dare you to go up there now.
Gary: Walk up the sides.
Shelly: No, no, I'm just kidding.
Gary: No really.
You just walk up the side like this.
Shelly: Gary.
Gary: As long as you stay close to the sides.
Gary: Okay Bryson, you're the dirt thrower.
I need dirt right here.
Gary: You have to have enough dirt in the
room.
to get to your level spot.
Gary: Okay Bry, let's do our string thing.
Bryson: Okay.
Bryson: Your string was in my way.
Gary: No, your dirt was in my string line.
Gary: We measure periodic spots
around the floor with a line level
to make sure we're up to speed.
Gary: Found a guy selling a
Shelly: Craigslist wasn't it?
Gary: Yeah, he was selling lawn mowers and
little tillers and stuff.
and this was just perfect size for us.
Bree: In 2005, our family moved from the conveniences
of the city to the open spaces of the country
Bree: Our original plan was to build a large
home
Bree: Welcome to our courtyard
Bree: Here is our Earth Bag bedrooms, my family
and how our plans changed
Shelly: We had talked about so many different
things we were going to do Like build a house
Gary: I wanted to put in a big house
Gary: We experimented with ideas of log and
steel
Shelly: But as we lived out here longer, we
started to meet some of the neighbors
Shelly: They were explaining living with alternative
building materials and living mortgage free
Shelly: This idea that we would have several
small structures
Shelly: The main house which isn't too much
of a main house. It's just a one bedroom,
one bathroom house
Shelly: And then build a bedroom for each
of the kids around the backyard to make a
courtyard
Gary: A house with outdoor halls
Shelly: We added lofts up into the house so
the kids would at least have a space to sleep
in until their rooms were built
Bree: When we finally settled on doing these
earth bag houses
Bree: I admit even half way through it, I
didn't think it was actually going to get
done
Bree: I was like, no, this can't be happening
Bree: Until I moved in, it was just like "Wow,
it's happening!"
Garen: When we were doing the floor, it was
me, Mom and Shae, I think, going through and
putting all the paper down
Garen: And Shae kept laying full squares of
pink down
Garen: For some reason she kept grabbing those
out
Garen: And they were all over the place
Shae: It's cute that you think that was an
accident
Shelly: What's interesting about a round room
is ...you know in your world, you step outside,
you're not in a square
Shae: It's really nice to have a break from
that. It's easier on the eyes to walk into
something that is more naturally built
Shae: Then to walk into something that is
very rigid and perfect
Bryson: I wanted a deck on the top of the
room for stargazing.
Bryson: We went through a couple of designs
and then we figured out this crazy eight idea
Bryson: Where it would be the same amount
of square footage as all the other rooms but
it would also provide
Bryson: two separate areas for stuff to be
put in.
Bree: We're breaking ground on Bryson's Earth
Bag Bedroom
Bree: The first thing we need to decide is
where we're going to put it.
Gary: If you were to see it from the house
Gary: keeping with how this is swinging around
Shelly: Are you going to have to take the
laundry down?
Gary: Well, maybe not
Gary: If we move it over this way
Shelly: We could just put it in Bryson's room
and he could just automatically be the laundry
guy.
Gary: I like it.
Bree: This clothesline is set low so we could
help when we were small.
Shelly: Sometimes it's hard to have kids help
when their little 'cause it's just easier
to do it yourself
but it's really important to let them help
because it allows them to feel like a valuable
part of the family,
Shelly: But I guess we could raise it now
that you guys are taller
But I kinda got used to it being short.
Bree: The laundry lines are moved out of the
way.
The guys set a center stake and mark out a
circle.
Gary: Put your finger right there. Tip it
down, and hold it straight up and down and
walk.
Gary: Alright! That's the inside.
Bree: Bryson's room will be made up of two
small circles, like a crazy eight.
Gary: Gonna put our trough in.
Bryson: We need a trench?
Gary: We need a trench.
Bryson: Alright.
Shelly: Okay Shae, I got our chart here. The
poles are 41 inches apart.
Shae: Alright.
Bree: We'll be using railroad ties for the
doorways.
Bryson: And then walk through here and then
we have a little walkway through here.
We'll have steps down and then we'll have
this room here.
Bree: The trench is cut in and leveled
Bryson: So, what we are doing is we picked
a spot which is our main level
We can see from right here if we pull this
up to the right level
We got about two inches to go
and this string will work its way all the
way around the entire loop
and we're taking these at about five foot
increments
so that when we lay down the bags, they will
all be level.
Bree: Once the posts are secure and the leveling
done, a threshhold is constructed.
Shae: Awwwwwww
Bree: One circle will be lower so Dad sets
up for the steps.
Gary: Come out here to 45 to here to a 45
'til we get a step. Then I'll build another
step in.
Five and a half inch risers and nine and a
half inch treads.
Bryson: We're putting cement in.
Shae: I'm balancing this. There's absolutely
no use to what I'm doing.
Gary: First time we have ever put steps in.
Bryson: Role this along, grab your bags off
Bryson: Fold them inside out.
Bree: We put down the first earth bag layer.
Bryson: Hang on, I'm retrieving my flip flop.
Shae: And then overtime they ask me to get
into a car, I'd be like, "Why?"
Bryson: Alright so we got a new tamper. 45
Buckaroonees.
Shelly: Wow, it works good.
Bryson: Really good.
Shae: [sing] na, na, na, ooohh oh
Bree: We're inviting some people over to help
with our earth bag building. It's time to
prepare.
Bree: First, easy access to damp dirt
Gary: Well, it's not like I forgot that Jeff
was coming over. But, he was there early and
I wasn't ready.
So, I jumped out of bed, 'cause he just knocked
on the door to get us some dirt for Bryson's
building.
Gary: We had laid out a circle for him to
be able to pull the dirt from.
Gary: What a time saver. You know the difference
between a huge bucket on a tractor and a wheelbarrow
and a shovel.
Gary: Ya, it will all level out just fine.
Gary: You did a great job.
Gary: It's amazing what you can get with a
few bucks and a case of beer.
Jeff: I go then.
Gary: I appreciate you.
Shelly: Thank you. You are awesome.
Jeff: I'll go back and make sure my couch
didn't move anywhere.
Bree: Next, installing the electrical wire
and boxes.
Shelly: Shae and Bryson and I had a goal that
we would put in one layer of bags a day.
and get up, I don't know, it's like a couple
feet up to the point where the guys are going
to be putting the electrical.
Shelly: There were several evenings we decided
we would just wait 'til the sun went down
and we'd put up this big light and just went
ahead and working into the evening
Shelly: Are you guys out there? I can't see
you.
Bryson: Ah, yes
Shae: ooooohhhhhh
Shae: Our bag building just right down there.
It's really scary, the fire is just right
there
On a hill not too far from here
Shelly: We wanted to get the electrical in
prior to the group of people coming over
because we just didn't want to mess with that
when everybody was over.
Garen came in to help us.
Garen: What universe have we ever been like
everyone?
Gary: Go ahead and put these boxes in.
in strategic locations for the inside.
and one for the out.
Gary: We have to separate the wire with the
barbed wire that we use to hold the bags.
We're able to use these U shaped nails to
be able to separate the two wires.
Gary: The purpose is so we don't get an electrical
short.
Garen: It shorts out, it is going to be a
bummer.
Bree: The electric will be hooked up to the
nearby solar system
Shelly: The final step before the group of
people came over which is getting one layer
above the electrical.
They broke up in two groups. Gary & Bryson
and Shae & Garen. They raced to see who could
finish the circle first.
Shelly: Oooohh, nice boots
Garen: Yeah!
Shelly: Ooooh, watch the nails!
Shae: They had a huge doorway in their bag
circle.
That they didn't have to bag.
Bryson: But you know they always have to have
the last word. Mainly 'cause they don't want
to loose any of their
or whatever.
Shae: Are we doing okay?
Bryson: But we totally won.
Garen: We just like crushed you.
Bryson: We beat 'em like nobodies business
Shae: Oh, we definitely won. We creamed them.
Bree: We need several cleats.
Gary: We have three different types of cleats
that we use. We have the simple cleat
that fits inside of the two bags.
Then we have another cleat
That fits up against a window. Then we have
a third kind that we use. They have kinda
an L shape.
Shae: We made over 40 cleats.
I can make mine really fast but Bryson
he put like a bazillion nails in there.
Bryson: And then when your done putting nails
on this side, you flip it over so the nails
stick up like this
Bryson: When you're doing the cleats, you
can put like 5 nails in it or like 20
and I was just putting mine in and I had them
beautifully
Nice. In a row. Everything symmetrical, perfect.
And Shae was just bam, bam, bam, done. Bam,
bam, bam, done.
Shae: 21 left.
Shelly: Wow.
Bree: 2x12 Window Frames are also needed.
Gary: Found on craigslist a couple of great,
brand new windows
a 4x3 and a 2x2. Cost us $120 for both windows.
Bryson: Windows, you know.
Bryson: We'll be using these for the steps
and window frames. 2x12s and 2x10s
Gary: The size of a window is static, meaning
it's usually a half of inch shorter
so that it will set inside of a window frame.
In our case, we could just make the frames
3x5, 3x4 and so on
Gary: I use three 2x6s and just nailed them
together as a big header.
Shae: Why do these things have to be together?
Gary: These are headers that go above the
window.
Help support the weight of the roof.
So that we're not putting the weight of the
roof over the top of the window itself.
Bree: Steps are next.
Gary: Okay, these are the threads for our
stairs
2x10s
They'll be nine and a half treads.
Here, come with me. I'll show you how it goes
on.
It will all go up
every two rows
we're gonna have one step coming up
and a circle going all the way up to there.
Gary: Inside the walls, we of course ran nails
up and ran nails down, similar to how we do
our cleats.
We chose to bring that out and let it just
kinda free hang
and maybe just a small, temporary post underneath
of it.
Shelly: We also are gonna have bottles prepared.
We're gonna put in little bottle windows as
the steps go up
Bree: Lastly, a center pole is placed for
measuring.
Gary: We place a pole in the center of the
building
An inch and a half pipe that runs completely
up about 9, 10 feet
Now, we have a nice pole that runs through
the center of the building
to be able to gauge the circular bags as they
go around.
Bree: The lightning storms are bringing additional
challenges.
Bryson: This is what happens when it gets
too wet.
Water starts bubbling up
the sides and it gets really slushy
like you can't bag on top of that. It's jello.
Gary:If that doesn't dry out, we're going
to be in trouble.
Bryson: My awesome room.
Dah Dah Dah!
You can see Dad by it.
We put in the arch
We're going to put up that arch there.
We put in one step to
go up
to the top of that
Bree: Our friends arrive to help build Bryson's
building. However, immediately, we experience
a problem.
A storm hits the night before dropping two
inches of rain.
Bree: So Dad, what happened?
Gary: We had a 2 inch rain and soaked our
bags
Gary: Trying to maneuver them around a little
bit
and we end up with half the wall collapses
on one side.
So we have to tear that all down. We have
to go back to the foundation.
and we have to start over.
Bryson: Restarting at the foundation was a
little discouraging.
Bree: But the other one, the other circle's
okay Dad?
Gary: Yeah, the other circle is okay.
Gary: So we start bagging as fast as we can
so when people show up
there's something to do when they get here.
I think the night before, if there's a chance
of rain, we're definitely going to put tarps
on.
Bree: I had this ingenious plan to split everyone
up in teams. However, there's no way to evenly
divide
the work because the layers have to go up
in sync.
But, that's our little secret.
Green Team mascot
Shelly: Wow, lots of enthusiasm.
Bryson: Oh yeah.
Shae: Our friends, Esther, Andrew, Deborah
and Peter came over to help us.
It was so much fun to work with them.
Bree: Faster than the speed of nature.
If there is a speed in nature.
Shelly: Do you know how slow nature is?
Andrew: It's too slow that's what it is.
Garen: We are the strength of the ocean.
Bree: That's right.
Shelly: Our favorite thing about building
with earth bags is that all ages can participate
Bree: Hello, coming in at ...we don't know.
and team Blue
Bryson: We are going to win.
Bree: Are you feeling it?
And then my, my home team right here.
The Green
Shelly: Are you guys the Yellow team?
Yeah, but what do we get Mom?
Shelly: It's a sign.
Bree: Hello, little bug.
Bree: We need to reinstall the electric
Shae: Esther and I ducted tape the wheelbarrow
wheel and it surprising worked for quite some
time.
Shelly: We used our arms to measure how long
we wanted the bags.
About 3 arms length.
and we straighten out the barbed wire as much
as we can.
Our friend, Jackie helped me out.
We cut it in sections using bolt cutters and
then it was laid between the bags.
Bree: The barbed wire springs into action
and Jackie is in the line of fire.
Gary: Some of my buddies from work showed
up
We had Scott, Alex, their son.
Malcom was here
Bree: Then our hero, Tom, shows up with Pizza!
Bree: After lunch we fixed the wall that had
fallen and were ready to go higher.
Gary: Everything wasn't that so bad with all
that rain. All that dirt now was a bit damp.
That made packing the new stuff a lot easier.
Shelly: It was pretty exciting to see that
first window frame coming in to be placed.
Bree: Whatcha doing Mom?
Shelly: I am putting in the bottle lights
for the steps.
Bryson: Hello Camera.
Gary: How are you doing Rick?
I tell you, he really is a trooper. He came
over and jumped up on that wall
and just started working hard so thanks Rick!
Gary: You haven't fallen off yet?
Rick: No vertigo.
Shelly: Is that rain?
Bree: Over here you can see a storm is threatening
But over here it's blue sky so you never know
if we are going to get hit or not
Gary: Some of us are desk job people. We are
starting to slow down.
Bree: We are over waist high in bags, 3 window
frames are installed along with 4 steps.
Bree: Having friends over to help build the
earth bag walls is a real boost.
We're half way to the top
Let's take a look at the cost so far.
Shelly: We are continuing our one layer a
day
and as we get higher, we'll have to back that
down to about a half layer a day.
Gary: We stayed pretty diligent on maintaining
the distance from the center pole
to the outside of the building.This is going
to really help us when we get to the roof
at the very top.
Bryson: Okay, so we're not nailing the cleats
in those until we get a little bit high
so we can level the windows.
Gary: That's a little different than we normally
do. We normally nail those cleats in as we're
going up.
This time we're gonna wait until after done
with the roof.
Bryson: And the building has to settle to.
Shelly: On the bags, we cut out about say
a 15 foot length or so and then we turn them
inside out.
and then we have to be careful that as we
lay them, the seams don't match up at the
same places.
Bryson: Our new addition to our farm.
Shelly: After the kids get settled in their
bedrooms, they get a pet.
Garen's dog, Diesel, he just gets so excited.
Shae: He's a little black lab and he's so
playful. He gets into all the bags when we're
trying to work.
Shelly: Aw. Rolly.
Shelly: Are you helping?
Shelly: The puppy is pooped.
Bryson: Play with the bag, a minute later,
out.
Bryson: Look how solid these things are. Amazing.
Bryson: Point them to the center pole
and we do every 2 bags
Just enough for like one person you know.
Like a normal step is longer. We cut it down
in size.
so it wouldn't take up most of the room
Gary: We're using cleats inside the walls
for hanging pictures
Shelly: It's really hard to know exactly where
gonna put those pictures so we put them everywhere.
Bryson: I tuck the end like a paper airplane
and then I'll step on that, curl it up and
lay it on my leg.
As they load in dirt, I just let it down.
And then at the end, I'll fold it and set
it down.
Shelly: We put 2 quart jars together and then
we tape them down with duct tape so they don't
move around.
until we get the bags laid over the top
The jars will now create this natural lighting
for each step.
Shelly: I wonder if we are going to run out
of barbs.
Shae: We ended up using around a roll and
a half of barbed wire.
Shae: Wear jeans, it's advised.
Shae: Probably $70 a roll.
Shelly: Second roll.
Bryson: We had to cover the bag building up
from the rain.
'cause it was making it soggy.
Gary: After the last problem with the rain,
we tarp every time when we figure it's going
to start raining.
Gary: With the header, we level both sides
so we get a nice box around the frame.
Bryson: Are we going to lay a bag over the
top of this?
Gary: Several bags actually.
Shelly: This is another place we added candy
jars so that some of the morning light can
come through.
Shae: And wave them in the air like you just
don't care.
Shelly: As we get higher, we start to need
more help to move that dirt up to the top.
Bree got in there and helped us out.
Bree: My dog, Max, came out and helped us
out while we were working
He went out on the top of the earth bags with
us
Bree: When your acrobats get you into places
you don't want to be.
Shelly: Oh, he passed the steps again.
Bree: Oh, now I'm really scared.
But I ended up having to go out and save him
because he couldn't get back down.
It wasn't as if there were stairs or anything.
Bree: Hold onto your hats, 'cause it's about
to get one.
Gary: Because we have a circle, I wanted to
put I wanted to put a design on top of it
the roof that's somewhat circular. So we laid
our joists on 2 foot centers, like your would
a normal patio roof.
Gary: We have 20 footers for the longest sections
in the circle.
Gary: Our jig that we are going to use
The joists will run in this direction here
for the rafters on the roof for that flat
roof.
and then we can adjust them up and down and
then cleat them in.
on both sides and then when the bags lean
up against them, that will give them lateral
strength this way.
and then these get all pinned in on the top
of the bags.
Gary: We have straight lines running north
and south
and then we needed to have joists that go
out perpendicular to the outside
put on there with joist hangers to help support
the weight.
and then there were these little jacks that
went off on a 45 from that.
Shelly: So just when we think we are done
bagging, we still have a little bit more bagging
to do
in between each of the rafters.
The alternative to bagging is cobbing and
that is not any fun to try to fill it with
cob.
Bryson: 50 pound tamp
Shelly: Oh yeah, it's beautiful
Bryson: And this entire area out here is all
going to be the top decking.
Gary: Since it's a deck we are going to be
walking on
I wanted like a 3/4 inch material or 7/8 material
Gary: I need to do 2 bisections.
Shelly: Gary can be working away and he just
seems to know
when it's time to slow down and teach the
kids something.
Gary: Two things, a square corner and bisecting,
you can split this up
into as many segments as you want to that
are all equal.
Gary: Pull up the plywood a little bit so
we can make our cuts
put our facia board on
re-attach the plywood
and we have a segmented roof up here that
almost looks circular
that's good
Bryson: Put telescope stuff on there and even
a bed maybe so we can sleep up there.
Gary: As usual, we're trying something new.
I'm not used to a roofing material that isn't
like, asphalt or steel
We went to a professional roofer
and he suggested we us the 30 pound felt
and 3 coats of snow roof.
Bryson: Here's what we're doing.
We are taking this microfiber and we're laying
over
the creases and we're covering it with the
white roof coat.
We ended up doing like 3 or 4 coats on there.
Shelly: The expenses are low until we get
to the roofing.
That's when the cost starts to really add
up.
Bree: The front half of the building takes
a creative shape
Gary: It's more conical.
Kind of a tilted cone
to give enough room for the inside to have
stairs.
they run up alongside and a door that goes
out to the flat roof.
Bryson: These go up there
for the door.
Gary: The door requires 2 posts be installed
on top of the flat roof.
Bryson: This is really how high we gotta go
all the way
Gary: Then we can run the bags along the sides
right up to those posts.
There are now tall bags on one side of the
roof
and shorter bags on the other because we're
stair stepping them up
to allow for the cone shaped roof.
Bryson: We old tent poles
and double barbed
to help strengthen the walls when they get
really high.
The platform is right at the top of the stairs
so that we can open up a door up there
and get out onto the main deck outside.
Gary: It just glues it right on there so we
don't
have any problem with squeaking.
Bryson: We use the same type of cleat system
that we used on the other roof.
Gary: We choose one of the door posts
at the top of the other room to be kinda a
center post.
Bryson: Before we put the plywood on we're
going to
have to bag up all around the outside edges
so that it's flush with the plywood.
Booyah!
We're closing in on the last little bit here
in the very, very corner.
It's right there and bagged all the way across
here.
and it makes it really nice. It closes in
the whole section.
It's pretty cool.
The last bag we will probably ever put up.
Right there.
Gary: Bryson and I go brain dead.
trying to get this facia on the outside
of this cone shaped roof.
There's a lot of compound angles
and I'm making calculations errors.
I got 2 facia boards up and we had to quit.
Garen notices how frustrated I was
and feels sorry for me
so the next day, he's out there helping.
He's helped us with the angles and bevels
up here
and its made a great difference this morning.
Bryson: If it wasn't for him we'd all be doomed.
Bryson: The sheeting up there
is like a puzzle.
It's so unique that we have to cut all these
odd angles
and we're doing angles, you know, when you
have an
angle this way and you have an angle that
way.
Anyway, these weird angles we keep cutting
and phew, those are hard to figure out.
Bree: We bought the wood for conical roof
frame all in one shot. The cost?
Gary: We're putting up a 6x6 porch
Bryson: We got some posts instead of going
down
to the forest and chopping them down
we bought them at the store.
There really straight
Gary: Unlike Bree's right?
Bree has these skinny little things, there
real strong.
It's all mesquite wood but it's just a totally
different look.
Next thing we do is get all the trim around
the edges.
The metal rain drip trim
and then finish paper, then we're ready for
the Ondura.
Bryson: We went with the Ondura 'cause it's
not as difficult to cut.
It's suppose to last really long. Right now
its
been up to a about a year on Garens' room.
And it seems to look the same as when we first
put it on, actually.
Gary: No fading
Bryson: Yeah, no fading at all.
Gary: So the product seems to be pretty solid.
We're still not sure.
Shelly: That's an interesting way to hammer.
Gary: Painful, to watch.
Bryson: Bam, bam, bam, done.
Shae: While the guys worn the roof, me and
Mom
decided to start with the stucco.
Gary: To prepare for the gals going around
the corner
there with the stucco. We need to have the
windows complete
so they can bring the stucco right up next
to the trim.
Gary: We built these particular frames where
they are
not attached to the bags or the header
Bryson: We're not going to do these windows
loose any more I don't think.
Gary: No, we're not doing them loose anymore.
Shae: They have the windows framed so we're
going
to start stuccoing at least one of these circles.
We've decided on stucco because it holds up
better in the rain.
Shelly: Bryson was up tamping 2 rows up from
the glass
and to our shock, it cracked.
Bree: I've found what we should put in there.
Shelly: Oh my goodness.
Shae: That's way too big.
Shelly: We'll make it work.
Shelly: Perfect fit.
Bree: Look at that.
Shelly: It's a perfect fit.
Bree: How are we going to get that in there?
Bryson: Wearing my glasses for protection
of her eyes.
Shelly: I got eye protection. I got "Bry"
protections.
Shae: It feels like the stucco goes really,
really slow.
Shelly: But we have been plugging away every
day
we do, you know, a couple batches
Shae: I keep getting dropped on.
Shelly: Part of educating our kids is to spend
about
an hour a day doing some sort of physical
work.
Gary: You know it's really important to have
the kids complete something.
There's nothing like finishing a project and
having that sense of accomplishment.
Shelly: One of the benefits of the earth bag
buildings
is that when they get done, they get a bedroom.
Shae: We started looking back it and
it looks like we've gone like super far
so obviously now that we're in the lead,
we're gonna make it a game and beat the boys.
Shelly:Yep.
Gary: The idea that the ladies can beat us
is a little unusual because we're really good
and very fast. And the Ondura goes up real
quick.
Bryson: And we can hammer those nails like
nobodies business. Bam, done.
Gary: However, just to make them feel better,
we ran out of materials.
Bryson: Yeah.
Garen: We can really slow them down Bryson
is not
to get the door done.
Bryson: Oh, because they can't cob around
the door
'til we're done.
Bree: Mom and Shae are racing to get the stucco
up
before Dad and Bryson can finish the door
and roof.
but, before they can get out there
the weather takes a turn for the worst.
Shelly: Ut oh Shae, this may put a damper
on our victory dance.
Bree: Meanwhile Bryson and Dad are working
inside.
Bryson: We got a really good deal on a wooden
door.
Gary: We only paid about $75 bucks for the
door on craigslist.
Bryson: My friend Andrew came over and he
helped out.
Bryson: I'm gonna spray paint these bolts
so they are black.
And stick them in the holes,
tighten them down, grind the tips off.
The door had 48 bolts
and nuts
and washers.
Bryson: There's a lot of washers.
Gary: I had to build a frame for it.
Bryson: Dad, it looks like you cut it right.
Gary: Oh, well amazing that.
Gary: Then assemble the door to the frame.
Which means cutting in the joints for the
hinges and
and do some dado cuts
and relieving, chiseling
and then set the door inside there.
Shae: We used cob for Bree's room
but cob requires a roof protection
Shelly: And also some sort of way of protecting
it
linseed oil or paint
Shae: We decided to use stucco which doesn't
wash away in the rain
My friend, Esther,
Esther: Hi
Shae: Was so much fun to have her over here.
Shae: You do it, I'll watch.
I'm just going to have to invite her every
time.
Bree: We use 10 or so bags of cement.
Bree: The gals are the clear winners
'cause the the ridge caps for the roof won't
arrive until next week.
Gary: We'd like to NOT admit that the ladies
beat us because
Bryson: Oh they didn't beat us
Gary: That's not even fair. We didn't have
all our stuff. It's still on order.
Bryson: We didn't have all our materials.
Shelly: Hey, but we won.
Shae: We did win.
Garen: The reason they lost was because Garen
was not there.
Shae: Oh Sure.
Bree: Since we now know the roofing cost.
Gary: This isn't the door we're going to be
installing but
we are going to be using this as a model.
The door up above is a slanted door at the
top.
Bryson: We used 7 2x6 tongue and groove and
we
glued them together to make the door.
Bryson: if I got up, this thing would go whoop.
Bryson:We used bolts to hold all the tongue
and groove boards together.
Gary: Originally we had decided we wanted
a round
window. Two half windows as one.
But we discovered that the width of the windows
was
just too much to take out of the center of
the door.
We'll go ahead and slide the windows this
way
and then turn it like this so that we have
less of a width and we have enough room for
the handle.
Bryson: Following the line to cut it out.
We're using that tool to do it.
So we pre-drilled the hole there
and are able to stick our blade in.
Make sure the hole is on the inside of the
line too.
From there we are able to cut around the whole
thing.
Bryson: So let's go ahead and put it in.
Gary: We're going to be using Butyl rubber
and this is a typical window sealant.
Instead of finding ways to clamp this into
the window
or screw it into the window like you would
typically do.
We're going to actually glue this little puppy
in
here with this Butyl rubber.
Shelly: Did you notice Bryson is not with
us?
Gary: Decided to go off and go skiing
Bryson: I love you guys!
Gary: While it's drying, I devised a quick
and easy
system here. I'll do this on both sides.
Then I can flip the door over and work on
the other side.
Gary: We hope that Bryson and the crew had
a great time skiing.
Bryson: The door turned out a lot better than
what I thought it was going to be.
Bryson: It fits!
Bryson: It acts almost like a skylight too
with the window
and so it lights the room real nice and stuff.
It's really, really cool.
Bree: We prepare to paint the exterior.
Shelly: Before we start painting, Bryson moves
the dirt away from the building.
And then we start taping everything off.
Windows, doors, bottle lights.
Bryson: I'm gonna go ahead and go around and
seal all the cracks up above with this foam.
Shelly: This paint is suppose to be one of
the best paints.
It's got UV protection and it's suppose to
be one coat
over the stucco. Which is going to be interesting
to see if it really is.
It was a lot of money. A little over $200
which is way more than we normally pay for
paint.
We usually get the recycle paints and pay
$10.
Gary: We chose to do a different method of
painting this time around.
Typically, in the past we've used rollers
and it's taken us several days to work on
it.
We own an airless sprayer.
The advantages to having the airless sprayer,
is
of course the biggest one, is time.
Gary: Now, let's try the other bit.
Gary: I hadn't used this thing in years
so we had to get it in, get it cleaned up
take it apart, oil it
We had things things all set up, flipped the
switch.
Nothing happened. Bryson takes his multimeter
out
has everything all hooked up. Says, it's the
switch.
So he went ahead replaced the switch with
a little wall socket switch that you have
at your house.
Bryson: Shut if off. Drum roll please.
Gary: Oh yeah.
Bryson: Okay.
Gary: When the boys were young, I was really
involved in their problem solving but Bryson
no longer needs my help.
He really enjoys working with anything electronic.
I just back away and let him do it.
Gary: I forgot how to use the sprayer.
So I gave the neighbor a call.
He gave me some quick instructions.
We got it primed right.
Gary: Okay, thank-you.
Gary: Do you think we're ready Bry?
Bryson: Gotta get the water out of it now.
Bryson: It's a brown.
Gary: Beautiful.
Gary: Alright, your going up.
Bryson: It was my job to paint.
Gary: The spray patterns and working with
how to spray
Bryson and I worked together and we got that
all figured out.
Eliminating a lot of the overspray
Conserving our paint.
Bryson: It was challenging to get up onto
those eves
but after awhile I got used to it.
Gary: Painting in the little corners and edges
takes a lot of time.
With an airless sprayer.
Got it right away.
Bree: I just want to show you this light switch.
This light switch proves My Little Homestead
was a part. This is our signature move.
We always put a light switch on electronics.
Anything we can't get to turn on, it gets
a light switch.
Bree: And it's the Garenster's job now.
Bryson: Show off.
Bryson: Garen jumped in there and helped me
out.
He always works really fast so it's like,
Oh Yeah.
Bryson: Alright, I think I got it.
Bree: Pretty slick huh?
Bryson: Yeah.
Gary: Cause it's kinda a thinner paint
so it went through that machine just perfectly.
Bree: An hour to paint the entire building.
So how do you think it went Dad?
Gary: What's that?
Bree: How do you think it went?
Gary: Oh gosh this is the only way to do this.
Absolutely, It was great.
Shelly: There was probably about 2 inches
on the bottom of the bucket
so it did make it.
It painted the whole thing including the eves.
And it's, it's a nice coat.
Shae: The majority of the painting is done
so now it's onto painting the trim
which is us girls job.
We're using this brownish, purple color
'cause it's what we have.
And it's not going to cost anything.
The guys will be working on
the trim around the door and the trim around
the patio.
Shelly: Finishing up the trim guys? The last
of it?
Gary: The last of the trim.
Bree: The guys head inside to begin the soil
cement subfloor.
Bryson: Soil cement is easy.
It's easier than laying normal cement. And
cheaper.
Gary: It's kinda like dry pour with a fence
post.
You know, you just pour your cement in, pour
some water in
and shazzam.
Bryson: Bam, it's done. The whole floor.
Gary: We have everything out of here right
now.
Bryson: We level out the floor.
Gary: So we can begin to level this floor
We want to level it about 3/4 inch down.
We're a little bit low on the backside so
we had to bring in some dirt
in to level it.
Bryson: Diesel has been a big help
Gary:Sure.
Shelly: He has?
Gary: Oh yeah, he's a wet dog.
Bryson: He's been breaking up the dirt for
me.
He was digging holes and it was making all
the dirt loose so I could scoop it.
Bryson: Good Boy.
Gary: Think how many muscles we are building.
Shelly: Yeah.
Gary: Yeah.
Bryson: Better than working out.
Shelly: Were you thinking about working out?
Lifting weights?
Bryson: No. Why would I? I'm doing this.
Shelly: Wow, Gary.
Okay, I dare you to go up there now.
Gary: Walk up the sides.
Shelly: No, no, I'm just kidding.
Gary: No really. You just walk up the side
like this.
Shelly: Gary.
Gary: As long as you stay close to the sides.
Gary: Okay Bryson, you're the dirt thrower.
I need dirt right here.
Gary: You have to have enough dirt in the
room.
to get to your level spot.
Gary: Okay Bry, let's do our string thing.
Bryson: Okay.
Bryson: Your string was in my way.
Gary: No, your dirt was in my string line.
Gary: We measure periodic spots
around the floor with a line level
to make sure we're up to speed.
Gary: Found a guy selling a
Shelly: Craigslist wasn't it?
Gary: Yeah, he was selling lawn mowers and
little tillers and stuff.
and this was just perfect size for us.
Shelly: Yeah, it 's a smaller one than last
time.
Gary: The idea is to put in about 1/2 inch
to 3/4 inch
of Portland cement.
Then we bring the tiller in.
and we till it down about 4 inches
working the Portland cement into the soil,
making soil cement.
Bryson: Pulling it backwards is actually better
than
having it go forward. Forward did not work
very well.
It was like rolling on top of the ground.
But, if you pulled back it, it would dig into
the ground nice.
Gary, We water it down, tamp it,
and then screet it and tamp it and kind of
work with it
until its all nice and flat
and then it gets watered for 3 days periodically
we'll come in and spray some water on it.
Gary: It's a nice, rough subfloor. Cob goes
over the top of it.
Bree: The next step is to complete the walls.
Cob is the material of choice.
Shelly: The kid's grandparents had a septic
dug
so they needed a place to put the dirt and
we said,
Oh yeah, just throw it on our property.
A few years later we started to build these
buildings and
doing cob and we came back to look at this
and
sure enough if this wasn't clay. So we've
got this big clay pile that we've been using
for years
Shae: We use a mixture of sand and clay.
This time though we did add some of our dirt
which is kinda like if you put it in a cup,
you know how you can tell where the
clay and the sand separate. We're about half
and half on our dirt so
we threw some in some of that and made it
extra sticky.
We cobbed in between the creases because we
had a
new system of doing it this round. We are
going to try
spraying the cob
Bree: I am slapping mud up on the walls, apparently.
Shae: Sunshine and butterfies.
Shelly: We're doing good guys, we got this
room chinked in.
Shelly: It's looking just ducky.
Bree: Just washed these so I could wear them
last night.
They were amazing.
Isn't there a rubber ducky song?
Shelly: Rubber Ducky - it's a Sesame Street
Bree: Your the one.
Shelly: It's a Sesame Street song but you
can't sing it. It will probably be copyright
infringement.
Bree: No, it's only the original track.
Shelly: Oh, let's hear it then.
Bree: Rubber Ducky you're the one.
You make bath time ...super fun?
I don't know.
Shelly: He can't hear me 'cause he has head
sets on
Bryson: What?
Shelly: Do the headsets make you go faster?
Bryson: I think they do.
Shae: We're done.
Gary: Instead of all the time we put the mud
on the walls.
We thought we would try this idea of spraying
it on like stucco.
But I don't have a stucco sprayer.
Bryson: No. We have a sheetrock mud sprayer.
We did try it. It failed the first time.
Gary: Yeah, it was very bad.
Gary: It is an experiment so testing different
ways of doing things
Bryson: Ready to test?
Gary: Gonna go with the 3 to 1 mixture
of sand and cement
Bryson: There's a pipe that's in here that
goes out to the end
And the problem was, it was restricting the
mud from
going out of the end. It was used for thinner
mud.
We just cut it back.
We're going to see.
Look where mud is at.
mud at the tip.
Bryson: So we made a couple of modifications
to it
and it worked.
Shelly: Wow, that's fantastic.
Shae: It saved a ton of time.
I like putting on cob up. It's really soothing
and nice but
I don't think any of us but the sprayer could
stay in the room.
'cause it was so loud.
Shelly: The texture is really rough.
We tried to soften it with the tool
and knock it off by hand.
Bree: I think it came out pretty good.
Bree: I don't know what I was expecting
but, I mean, that's sure a whole lot of work
saved.
Shelly: We eventually just used the broom
to brush it off.
We didn't want to go over the entire walls
again
flattening it out so we decided to just go
with the rough look. Bryson was happy with
it
so that's the main thing.
Shae: A lot of cob fell off the wall.
I mean a lot of it made it on the wall but
a lot fell too so we just had to pick that
up
at the end of days works and
we put it in wheelbarrows and we'd use it
the next day.
Gary: Probably one of the most imprtant things
about us is
not that all the corners are all straight
and the walls are all perfectly round.
Shelly: Family project.
Gary: Yeah, it's more of family thing or family
time
together. It's really important to us.
Shelly: A lot of times you just want to jump
in there.
If the kids are going to join in
and be a part of it, you just got to let it
go.
Gary: Um hum. We keep things within safe tolerances
There's just something about the roof falling
in on the
children when we're not there that could be
bad
Shelly: Right but you would jump in if it
was a safety issue.
Gary: Oh yeah, absolutely.
Bree: Next, we prepare for painting.
Shelly: We needed to buy brand new paint because
we wanted to us the sprayer again to spray
the interior walls
so when I was at the store,
I found a 5 gallon bucket of paint on sale.
It was clearance for like $35
and it was interior, it was semi-gloss.
It was everything that we needed and I just
couldn't resist.
There was only one draw back and that is um
Bryson: Oh my gosh.
Shelly: It was pink.
Shelly: What?
Bryson: I see lots of pink.
Bryson: Pink? It was pink.
Shelly: It has a pink hue
Bryson. It was pink.
Shelly: I ..I ..it ..it, maybe it's more
Bryson: Pink
Shelly: Not maybe pink but salmon.
Bryson: Pink.
Shelly : We needed to convert the pink color
and we wanted it to be a light brown
so we looked it up and we found out in order
to
change the color, we needed both yellow and
blue.
Bryson: We ended up adding green and saving
the day.
Shelly: We just kept adding that green color
and Bryson would mix it until we got a color
that
actually turned out to be a really nice brown
color.
Bree: With the paint dilemma solved,
Bryson can now get to painting.
Bryson: Aw man, I really like this paint.
It's not that pink that I was worried about.
Go upstairs.
There we go. There's the whole room.
Bree: Dad begins the planning.
Gary: Close in, in 1x3s.
to create a frame underneath the stairs.
Shae: I'm helping you out Dad.
Gary Thanks Honey.
Gary: I'm gonna cut something now.
Shelly: What are you making?
Gary: A thingy.
Gary: No profoundness.
Gary: The closet under the stairs was
something to help support the other side
of the steps themselves.
What was really cool about the cedar is that
we found
fence boards, inexpensive ...what 97 cents
for each piece
so it was real cheap to be able to put that
on.
The risers are all built underneath
so they kinda set inset, underneath
using 1x3 material.
And then on the outside, the walls actually
built
on a curve, in small sections just underneath
the stairs.
So it looks like a curve but really it's a
series of straight lines.
And then we put the cedar boards on the outside
for a nice look.
to kinda finish it off.
Shelly: Staining this with some golden pecan.
That's what Bryson wants.
Bryson: Yep. So beautiful.
Gary: And then put a door on the end.
Shae: Aw geez, when little kids come over
this is going to be a great place to hide.
Gary: Okay, these are my boards for the door
that's
going to go to the closet.
3/4 inch x 6 inch tongue and groove.
One side is surfaced with a rough surface,
the other
side is smooth.
We are going to have rough surface out
since all wood around it is all the same.
Put the cross braces on in similar fashion.
We're going to design it the same way
as we designed the front door that we had
in the upstairs door.
Gary: We're going to install this bedroom
door handle.
It's black to match our hinges and so on.
It is 3/4 inch material so I have to put a
block on the other side.
so that this has something to go into.
Shelly: Paint these all black so they match.
This is flat black just like did the other
bolts.
Bryson: Cool. And then the door is gonna have
Gary: It goes in like this, remember how we
had the other ones done?
I bought one for each one of the panels.
We'll be drilling a bolt in each one of these.
Kinda give it that same look and feel.
Gary: These were a little short so we're counter
sinking them.
Gary: You'll have to close the door a little.
Gary: There, see like that. Up just a touch.
Might be a little adjustment
Let's look at it though
Gary: I love garage sales. Shell picked up
a belt sander
I've been wanting one of these things for
years.
Paid a couple bucks for it.
Gary: We just need to put the striker plate
on and the door is done.
Bryson: And a stopper don't you think, Dad?
To stop it.
Bree: While Dad was installing the closet.
Bryson is laying the floor on the landing
using left over materials.
Bryson: I used some left over flooring material.
Bryson: Drawing out the pattern.
I'll go trim it out.
Gotta get this as tight against that wall
as possible.
Bryson: The flooring locks together with tongue
and groove.
Bryson: Alright Dad.
Dad: That really looks good.
Bryson: I trim it out using 1x2.
It's an easy install.
Bree: It's ceiling time.
Shelly: For our ceiling we like to collect
pallets and
that's probably our favorite ceiling
is the pallet ceilings. They worked out
really well for us and we've used them on
on about 3 projects now.
Our resource for pallets are beging to run
a little dry.
Gary: Dried up.
Shelly: So I had this idea
that I wanted to get, you know, like the wood
floor.
Like what you those little planks.
And I thought if I could find some on Craisglist
used
maybe we could find a chunk of them
and be able to use them up on the ceiling.
You just wanted to make sure that is was real
wood.
Gary: Wood.
Shelly: That was the mainthing for you.
I saw somebody selling over 300 square feet.
And they wanted a little over $100 for it.
Gary: Yeah, cheap.
Shelly: So, we discussed it and we thought
we'll go
look at these things. We couldn't tell from
the ad
if it was actual wood or not.
And if it was what we wanted. we would offer
$100 for it.
We get there, and the guy who was selling
it, and
I said, "Is it wood?"
And he said it's laminate.
So I looked over at Gary
and I said, "Laminate?"
And you affirmed that is was laminate.
So I'm thinking, Laminate
You know, wood
Is there not laminated wood?
Gary: Yeah, plywood is laminated.
Shelly: So I looked at him and said, "Would
you take $100 for it?"
And he said, "Yeah."
We had to back the car up. We get in the car
Gary: Oh boy.
Shelly: I was like, "What's wrong?"
Gary: We didn't get wood.
Shelly: But you went along with it anyway.
Gary: I did. I don't have to be a wood snob.
Shelly: Yeah, you are... He is a wood snob.
Gary: This way we get the floor on the ceiling.
Gary: Well with our new idea of making a floor
a ceiling.
Gary: I guess that's how it's going to go
in.
I've never hung flooring on a ceiling.
Kinda new to me.
A little different.
Not sure how to finish that off but we'll
figure out something.
Bryson, take that one right there.
That might work here. I don't know.
Gary: It's kinda like a uni-click.
Where all 4 sides of the
planks lock in.
Shelly: That's beautiful.
Gary: So you have to have all your
seams have to be perfect.
Because we can't get it to really hang up
there.
We do have nail it in because
we can't walk. In case you're walking up there,
you don't want it to move on you.
So you nail it down.
Bryson: Put some insulation up there.
Gary: Do a little bit at a time. Insulation
Little bit at a time, insulation
We're putting in R-30 insulation.
Bryson: R-30 instead of R-35
Gary: R-31 1/2
Yeah, that's hard to find.
Shae: This is Not insulation.
It is the devil's cotton candy.
The most feared, itchy
Yet strangely beautiful in color.
Bryson: I hope I got the angle right.
Shae: Bryson did a great job cutting the edges
but there's still a gap between the wall and
the ceiling.
We decided to use spray foam to fill the gap.
Because of the rough wall we were able to
do it.
Shelly: We're just going to try to blend it.
We can fake this to make this look like cob.
Shae: Painting the foam here.
Trying to blend it in with the wall.
Shae: And it turned out pretty good.
Bryson: Shae's washing the ceiling
Shae: I'm washing the floor.
Gary: You know you need a mop.
Bryson: Oh yeah, beautiful. Look at that.
Shelly: We started to run out of laminate
flooring
and we knew we weren't going to be able to
make it
on that second circle.
So we decided to buy another batch
'cause we knew we wouldn't be able to match
it exactly.
The colors are similar but the front building
is a little bit lighter.
This time we made a better deal and
ended up getting more and paying less for
it.
Bryson: The back circle was flat and then
the front circle was angled.
Bryson: We're going to span a distance from
this side
over to this pole here.
Bryson: I had cut angles to each individual
piece.
It was all segmented out so that each section
was flat.
And then they all kinda just came around.
Shelly: This part over here, Bryson's really
looking forward to.
Bryson: Right here
we only have a pole here but no pole out here.
But they'll be just fine because they interlock.
So they hold each other in as they
as they go down.
Bryson: It was a fan and it had a light on
it.
Officially an unboxing video of a fan.
Bree: It's your biggest fan.
Gary: Take a pair of pliers and bend those
to fit
and it'll be fine.
Gary: Don't do too much because these are
just spot welded
in there. I don't want that to come loose.
But, just these pieces.
Bryson: Gotcha.
Gary: Perfect.
Bryson: Okay, okay, hang on. I got this.
Bryson: I was trying to put a screw in.
Um hmm.
Yep. And it was tall.
And I just kinda got a little frustrated with
it.
So I ..yeah
Garen had to save me.
Garen: What? What was that?
What was that Bryson? Huh? Huh?
Bryson: He's probably better with drill than
I am.
I can beat him any day in 3D printing so
Gary: Very nicely done.
Shelly: Is that it?
On no there's one spot left.
Shae: Yeah, I know
That's it. I'm giving up right there.
Shelly: You're gonna leave that one piece?
Shae: Yeah.
Shelly: That is so nice of you.
Shae: Thank-you. Yeah, it is nice of me.
Bryson: Done.
Gary: We're going to have to extend the fan
light pole
that drops down from the ceiling because
Bryson: The roof is so steep
Gary: in that section.
Bryson: The fan would just hit the roof. Thump,
thump, thump.
Shelly: We're just staining. These are the
pieces
that are going to be - I guess we can them
trim
for the ceiling?
Bryson: Yeah
Shelly: That what we call them Bry?
Bryson: They are going to fit up
Shelly: up on the ceiling
Bryson: They are going to fit up in between
the seams
up here on the roof.
They are going to cover up the creases up
there.
Bryson: Under the landing was just simple,
flat stuff.
Put some cedar siding around the edges of
the platform.
Looks pretty nice now.
So that it will match the closet.
'Cause the closet is cool.
Shelly: The cost
of the insulation wouldn't change.
Gary: It's just he cost of whatever we cover
the insulation with.
Pallets are free.
But there not totally free. We still have
to go pick them up.
We still have to tear them down
Shelly: We paid $100 for the first batch and
$75 for the other.
So it ended up being $175 for the ceiling.
So the real savings, like you said is in the
time savings that it had.
Gary: It was huge. I mean that was a lot of
work
pulling those apart.
Shelly: It does take a long time to break
them down and...
We still like the pallets.
We just thought we would do this to do something
a little different.
Gary: You know us, we like to try something
different.
Bryson: I think the ceiling turned out really,
really well.
Gary: Bryson, that looks so cool.
Gary: You know I like wood so you
might expect that I wouldn't like it but
I actually do like what we are seeing there.
So, it's a nice look. It will be easy to maintain.
Installation was pretty easy. So yeah, overall
good.
Bree: It's onto the rocket stove.
A couple months back the guys began to plan
where they're going to place it.
Gary: My thought was, firebox, can, a bench
and then you won't take off in the room too
much.
Bryson: And we put a bench here.
Bree: They decide on the back circle.
Gary: Probably won't need no more than, probably
this wide.
Bryson: Our benches are usually straight but
we decided to give this one
a little bit of a curve, match the wall.
Gary: Contours the wall.
Bryson: What he said.
Gary: We bought the barrel at local oil changing
business in town.
$5
Bryson: It's good
Gary: We had the first design where we wanted
to use block but,
Bryson: The problem with this look
this look is nice but
we have to cut all of them in half.
Gary: So we gave up on that.
Shelly: I like those.
Gary: We found some terra cotta that we had
acquired somewhere.
Gary: Another inch or two of cob seat.
Bryson: It's only going to be about that height.
Bryson: We got the piping at the local hardware
store.
Gary: At the end of our bench here
I wanted to put to be able to put a clean
out
so we can clean out in different areas.
Gary: That will be plenty of room to get that
in.
Bryson: Dirt, lots of dirt.
Bryson: We were fortunate to already have
some firebrick.
This is the base of the firebox.
Gary: Putting brick along side that too.
so are you ready for that?
Bryson: Yeah, I'm ready
Gary: Here's our opening down here.
Come around this way here.
You might be able to get this to focus right.
There we go.
Gary: A firebox that we push in from the front
as opposed to from the top.
Shelly: Okay, so the fire is in that little
thing, huh?
Bryson: Um hmm.
Shelly: Okay.
Bryson: We built the firebox a little different
this time.
Instead of running the wood in from the top,
we ran it from the side.
Shelly: Is this the opening that Dad is working
on?
Gary: Yeah, and then the chimney stack comes
up this way.
Shelly: Bryson got new boots.
Bryson: A bit dusty.
Shelly: So now you're feet aren't going to
pop out on every video that we do.
With that bright orange.
Bryson: They're going in my keepsake.
Shelly: They're going in your keepsake?
Bryson: Yep.
Shelly: Okay.
Gary: 6 Inch height. We should go with 12
inches.
Bryson: We could go look at it. Do you want
us to go look at it?
Bryson: So yeah. If we go 12 inches up from
the top of his barrel, which is here.
Then that's about where it is on his.
Bryson: Garen's seems to work really well
so we're going to go with a 12 inche one.
Which is pretty much simple mathematics.
When you have a 6 inch pipe, you want to go
a 12 inch chimney.
It's just 2 times.
Bryson: It's a 3 to 1 ratio that we used for
the combustion chamber.
Gary: We sometimes have had like a smaller,
like a 6 inch
and then maybe an 8 inch or 10 inch
pipe around it.
But our barrel is not quite big enough for
that.
Gary: We didn't really have materials around
the property.
Gary: Come up 2 inches and flare it.
Bryson: Measuring out 14 inches so he can
flare these back an inch.
I don't know what I just suggested but Dad
likes it.
Gary: So we literally built one.
Bryson: Three thick.
Shelly: Locking them on.
Bryson: Um hmm.
Gary: We tape them together with that great
metal tape
which works really well.
Enough to at least set a form
and then we use cob inside the chamber itself.
Gary: That's a combustion chamber that we
built.
Gary: As far as the insulation - the insulation
from the inside of the chamber to the out.
Gary: We have a minimum of 2 inches that we
have from
the outside of the combustion chamber to the
inside of the barrel
that sets over the top of it.
Shelly: Two inch taller
Bryson: than the chamber.
Gary: So it would be 2 inches at the top
and minimum of 2 inches around
Bryson: on the outside edge.
Bryson: It means I have to go get a new one.
Shelly: It looks a little grinded down.
Bryson: Ringing ears and a barrel.
Bryson: Set it down.
This goes like this.
Wood in here.
Fire burning here.
And air gets sucking into here
and then it goes trough this chamber,
and then the barrel is going to set on top
of it
which is going to allow the fire to burn up
and around.
It's gonna come down.
And it's going to exit out that way, come
down here.
Come back around the back
and up and out.
Bryson: Diesel was chewing on these.
Gray: At this point now we're trying to level
our combustion chamber.
But also have to make sure
that we're within 2 inches from the top.
One way to do that is I'm going to measure
up from here
straight across and see where this fits.
It should fit about about ...hey look at that,
9 1/2.
It comes up here 9 1/2 so we're good
getting our couple inches up at the top
which is what we want.
Gary: Kinda needs to sit where it needs to
sit.
Bryson: The clean out on the end.
Gary: Right here we have some barbed wire.
We need to go ahead and cut that loose
so I can get a pipe through.
Bryson: There's a hole in the wall.
Gary: I think I have the angles right.
Bryson: We angled up the exhaust a little
bit up
as the pipe went on so the smoke would always
have an exit going up.
Bryson: We're going to test
our fireplace out before we cover it all up
just to make sure everything is built correctly.
Gary: Like we did on the other rocket stoves,
you don't need a lot of clearance between
the wall
and the stove pipe itself
because, there's not a lot of heat
that's put off by the stovepipe.
The combustion chamber provides a really
efficient burn. Burning a lot of the materials
there. A lot of heat is spent
there, as the little bit of smoke
and little bit of moisture comes out of
the combustion chamber. The bench
passively stores the heat from the combustion
chamber exhaust.
Garen: You run it that big for
half hour, an hour...
Bryson: Just feel the heat. I mean that is
awesome.
Shelly: Yeah, it's really nice.
Bryson: I should chuck more wood it there,
why? Because it's fun.
Shelly: It will feel really good when it's
100 degree out.
Shelly: Are you happy with this Bry?
Bryson: Yeah.
Gary: We're just tamping this down.
Getting it into the corners.
Making sure that we are filling up the entire
box.
Bryson: Dad, this is awesome.
Shelly: So how much higher are you going to
go with this Bry?
Bryson: We'll go about an inch higher than
these bricks.
Shelly: Okay.
Gary: The family artist is at work putting
together her
re-creation of sculpting and molding
Trained, of course, by her famous Jack
who helped bring her along
and make her the sculptor she is today.
Shae: Dad, we're not bringing Jack back.
Shelly: Bryson doing a great job over here
too.
Kinda rounding if off.
Looking good.
Gary: oh, that does look good.
Shae: Jiggle it.
Bryson: Like jello.
Shelly: Wow, that's beautiful.
Bree: After the cob is completed,
Mom runs to get the tile bucket.
Shelly: Kind of a junky tile bin but let's
see if
put some tiles in there.
What does Shae got going over here, a little
design.
Shae: I'm just pushing 'em down. I hope they're
going to be alright.
Shelly: It looks good Bry.
That's a nice look.
Gary: Finishing up the flue.
The exterior flue coming out
and making an elbow turn.
Going up. Putting a little cap on top for
rain.
Bryson: Metal taped it onto here.
And then I bent this down
to try to keep wind out of the top here.
Alright, we got it all finished up.
It's on there and perfect.
Bryson: There's the closet
and the rocket stove.
Right here.
Pipe going up and out.
It's a very nice seat, it is.
And
the glowing coals.
Bree: With the rocket stove complete, it's
time to move onto the cob floor.
Or it might be referred to as an earthen floor.
Before we get started laying the cob floor,
we need to place the tiles on the steps,
stairs,
and entry.
Gary: Would like to make the steps a little
stronger.
Cob has a tendency to break down.
So we tile the area that gets the harder work.
I have concrete underneath
and then I'm cementing the tiles in
to the steps.
Shelly: We've had these little brown tiles
on the property since we bought this property.
What 10, 12 years ago Gary?
Gary: Yeah.
Shelly: We may have found a use for 'em.
Shelly: Okay, we're just laying some time
ideas out
for the entry.
Shae: We're putting these down with liquid
nails.
So that will be fun.
Gary: This is a 15, 6.
Shelly: 15 sand, 6 clay?
Garen: Yeah.
Gary: We did have to filter the clay.
The sand was just perfect.
Garen: They just keep bringing me loads and
I would just smooth it all out,
get it all level.
Gary: Also too Garen, this is the low side.
So the higher you want to make it, the better
for the floor.
Garen: Okay.
Shae: Garen has just got this talent to
be able to level the floor with his eye
and it just looks amazing
and it's smooth and it's a beautiful floor
and
I'm gonna be honest,
he is
almost as good as I am.
Bree: Garen has a knack for leveling the floor
by eye.
How do you do it?
Garen: Make sure that the room is real light
so you can see
you know, what's higher and what's lower.
If the room is all dark, you don't get the
glare off
from the water, off the cob and
it always looks fairly close.
You can see level a little better from the
shine.
It looks level when you walk around and you
kinda tilt your head.
Gary: It looks...
Garen: Perfect.
Shelly: One batch after another.
You got this thing going huh?
Gary: They're punching the clay out so fast
and getting that cob floor installed.
The work that I was trying to do was
get the steps tiled. At least to a point where
they could
cob up next to it. So I had stay ahead of
them.
That was quite a challenge.
Shelly: Wow. It looks complete.
Shelly: Are you hiding?
Garen: I'm hiding. Yes.
Shelly: Gonna do some time lapse of the floor.
Shelly: Gary, took off and got a snack, I
see.
Gary: Peanuts.
Shelly: Peanuts, um, I would say it's a little
more than peanuts.
Gary: It might have a few m&m's in there.
Gary: I used my own mixture of cob,
with sand, clay and a couple little
2 inch shovelfuls of cement.
Bryson: That was close
Gary: It's just really good. Garen did a great
job.
Garen: It wasn't just me.
Bryson: Day 3 and we're waiting for it to
dry.
We did put these bricks here to help keep
the dogs out.
Bryson: The floor is finally dry after 4 days.
Shelly: Cardboard keep our feet from scuffing
the floor up.
Our feet could tear up the floor pretty easily.
Bryson: I used boiled linseed oil.
Just gonna use a roller here and roll it on.
We're going to go ahead and do 5 coats on
this floor.
Shelly: Okay, this is the floor after. You
can see the linseed has soaked in.
It's not shiny.
Ready for another coat.
Bree: We apply 5 coats of linseed oil over
the
coarse of a few days
to allow for dry time in between.
We used about 7 gallons of linseed oil.
Garen: We put a quick coat of wax
on the floor after the coats of linseed.
And we just use a hardwood floor wax.
Bryson: Oh hey, look at this?
Bryson: Oh, this is so cool.
Bryson: Does that work?
Bree: Now, we need some power.
Garen uses solar panels. However,
we need more panels if we want to add Bryson's
room to it.
Gary: Last year we purchased for Garen's room,
two solar panels, two batteries
and a full kit to do that inversion
to A/C.
Shelly: Yeah, and it was our first test of
getting solar
Gary: In a bigger scale.
Shelly: We can't afford to buy it for the
whole house
but we thought we would start with the little
rooms.
He's been running a little over a year on
that now
and so it was a good test for us to see how
it would do.
And it actually has really well
with the exception of, he cannot run his 3D
printer over there.
Gary: I think the 3D printer would run for
6 to 8 hours.
And that was the problem, is it took a big
drain.
Knowing that we had to increase Garen's room
by
one more panel, we just added four panels.
Shelly: Yeah, because Bryson has a 3D printer
as well.
Shae: We have our panels.
Shelly: And our batteries are tucked under
here.
We have 4 panels and 4 batteries.
And then some cabley things to connect them.
Shelly: There's the store too.
Shae: Yes, that is the Solar.
Shelly: He's got a new sign. He didn't have
that last time.
Shelly: Let's head home and hook them up.
Shae: Yes, let's do.
Bree: Garen will increase our current system
to from 2 panels to 6 panels.
Bree: He installs 2 poles with supports angled
32 degrees toward the sun.
Garen picked an angle somewhere between summer
and winter.
We purchased brackets that are designed to
connect the rails.
Shelly: Are you teasing the pig?
Bree: The structure is in place.
Time to slide in the additional panels.
Bree: It's a one to one ratio
from panels to batteries.
Garen attaches it using specific connectors
for the panels.
Garen: We need a thicker wire to handle the
power coming in from 6 panels so
I'm going to replace this wire here.
Put a heavier gauge stuff in.
Shelly: Was it 6 gauge?
Garen: Yeah, putting 6 in.
Shelly: What is that?
Garen: 10 Gauge.
Garen: Coming to help me dig?
Garen: Good boy.
Bree: Diesel doesn't leave Garen's side and
tries to help wherever he can.
Shelly: That's the 6 gauge that's come under
the building
Garen: Electricians look away, please.
Don't see my beautiful handiwork.
Shelly: Okay, so the white one went up to
this.
And the black one is going up there.
Garen: This thing will take up to 6 panels.
Bryson: So Garen, how did you wire these in?
Garen: Okay, so we have 6 panels,
3 and 3 is what we've separated them in groups.
And the reason is, if you get too many amps
running through the little wire we have,
So we can't have 6 panels running through
the little wire.
We take and we wire 2 sets of 3 panels into
one box and we wire them into a big 6 gauge
wire.
Under the ground, and that will go straight
into the control panel.
Because all my wires are coming out of here
are black
and they're not labeled. I'm just going to
check them on the multi-meter.
We can check which ones are which.
These are coming out of 2 sets of 3 panels.
You don't want to touch any of these together
because these are all hot 'cause of the sun.
It's not like you can turn the sun off.
Bryson: Put these blocks behind it.
It helps stick it out.
Because the cob, the box is way back here.
The building came way out here.
So
the cap won't fit on it correctly.
Garen: I am wiring up the batteries.
Bree: Our system is 24 volt so we buy 12 volt
batteries in sets of 2.
Bryson: We have 6 batteries here and he wired
2 these together with minus to plus with a
jumper.
Then he took and ran the 2 plus and minus
over to a main jumper.
Garen: I'm gonna check the voltage, make sure
that it is 24 volts coming out 'cause otherwise
you can get If you wire them all together
which I may of done first, you get 75 volts
out of this thing and you only need 24.
Yeah, we're right on.
Right on 24.
Bryson: He takes the 24 volts and connects
it to the main cables which go up to here.
Bryson: We bought the perfect amount of wire.
We didn't even cut this. It was the prefect
roll.
So it comes out here from the building. Up
to that building.
Right there it goes in.
And diesel, he's watching and he's learning
and he is ready to help.
Garen: You wanna help me out?
Bryson: He was laying in the ditch a few minutes
ago. Yep.
Garen: How can you always be in my way?
Bryson: Looks so beautiful Garen.
It does.
Gary: Turn it on.
See if you have light.
Garen: Shut it off, we don't have power.
And we know mine has power.
Maybe something unhooked?
Gary: Do you have a wire that is not connected
up?
Bryson: No juice.
Gary: Maybe it's the breaker.
Garen: No voltage there.
Bryson: So it's the breaker?
Garen: Oh, I see what it is.
Gary: Check the bus.
Garen: Okay, we should have power now.
Shelly: Was it just in the wrong slot?
Garen: Yeah.
Bryson: Very hilarious.
Bree: The solar panels and batteries are separate
from the building costs since it's optional.
Last year our budget for the initial system
was $3000.
This year we didn't need to purchase the inverter
which was half the cost.
We budgeted $2500 for the 4 solar panels and
4 flooded batteries.
Gary: Part of homesteading is moving off of
the grid and that gives us the independence
of our own power.
Shelly: It is our goal to be completely off
gird.
But, it's not very pratical for us right now.
So we're just taking small steps to get there.
Well, a bedroom's not suppose to take a crazy
amount of power.
Gary: Except when you have 2 sons like ours
that
Shelly: Each have 3D printers, who want to
print for hours on end.
We got 6 panels for just those 2 bedrooms.
It'll be interesting a year from now
to see. Could we run those 3D printers?
Bree: It's time to move him in.
But first, we need to buy him a real bed.
He hasn't had one for over 10 years.
Bryson is a camouflage fan
so it's time to give a camo paint job, a try.
Shelly: Here's all the colors we got.
We looked it up online and learned how to
do it.
Shelly: Our base color, kinda an olive green.
We'll put that base down first.
Bryson: Always paint left in cans.
Or not that one.
Not that one either.
There's no more paint.
Bree: The youtube video we learned from used
real leaves but since we don't have any real
oak tress around here,
Garen has an idea.
Shelly: Oh, and then you're going to do that
one?
Garen printed them out and then we taped them
on some light cardboard.
Shelly: It's blotchy in some places but
I guess it's suppose to be a little blotchy.
Shelly: Let's try another color over the top.
Garen: We should be doing it on this side.
Hold paint a little better.
Shelly: Oh yeah.
Shelly: Now it's looking totally like camo.
Poor thumb.
Garen: I should have glove on.
Garen: That's it, right there.
Bryson: This is really awesome Garen.
Garen: Shadow from the black.
[Girls talking indiscriminately]
Shelly: It takes two of you guys to wax that?
Shae: Definitely.
Shelly: It's beautiful though I have to say.
Shelly: I made some curtains out of camo.
Not really a seamstress but we put a blanket
that we weren't using to be the liner.
So he'll have some extra protection from the
cold.
Bryson: It felt really awesome to be moving
into my room.
At first you don't believe it. You're just
like no way.
I had to pinch myself just to figure out we
were actually moving stuff in.
Some friends came over to help so it was all
fun.
The desk that I had was just
way too big.
It was nice but it just wouldn't fit in the
room.
So we ended up taking it apart and fitting
it against the wall
so we could put the whole desk in there.
We even had to build some legs and stuff.
And as we were taking it apart, all of a sudden
the whole thing collapsed into this flat pile.
And we're like, Oh.
So we took some screws and screwed it back
together
and built legs for it and got it in there.
Bree: Alright Bryson, what are you doing?
Bryson: It's a mess. Don't look.
And it is a mess but I think I know where
half this stuff goes.
Bryson: Potato gun.
Pretty sweet.
Bree: I forgot about that chest.
Bryson: You know, I think I'm going to put
it over there.
Bree: Each of us have a light box in our rooms.
for filming reasons.
Bryson: Used for filming.
Actually, I can put a light box back there.
Bree: Where's your 3D printer?
Bryson: It's right there.
Bree: Oh, I see.
Bryson: I didn't realize I had so much stuff.
Garen: Holy cow. So much stuff.
Bryson: I keep boxes of things you would never
use anymore.
Garbage electronics, things that have broken
and I throw 'em in boxes and I keep 'em. 'Cause
I go, you know what?
Oh this might have a couple electronics in
here I could use to fix something else so
I keep it.
Someday it could save your iphone.
Bryson: I was sleeping up in this loft before
I moved in.
I was happy to move out of there.
This is my old loft up here.
Oh boy, it's dark up here.
And the loft actually was a lot of fun up
there.
It was nice and cozy.
The bedding I used to sleep on.
[sniffles]
Bye Bye.
Don't need you anymore.
It's really nice to finally have walls to
decorate.
It took 2 days to move everything in, possibly
even 3 if you count all the boxes.
Is it really and then you wake up and you're
just like,Oh my gosh, I'm moved into my room.
It's unbelievable.
Yeah, that was awesome.
Bree: And now, Bryson's ready to give us a
tour.
Bryson: Alright, so let's go take a look at
my new room.
But first before we get to the inside, we
have to go around the outside.
Nothing to see here but paint.
'Til you get around to this side.
Which is the more funner side.
Which is actually a dictionary word now so
We can use "funner" now.
We got these glasses in here.
This thing.
Window.
Cameraman keep up. We got so much to see
and so little time.
Our newest addition, a pot with what is going
to be a live grape.
So let's go inside.
Got a nice basketball hoop.
Closet.
Shine some light on the subject.
Dog likes to be in here too. Get out.
I've got a nice computer area.
3D Printer, Stuff like that.
And then in here
We got our rocket stove going on over here
Our bed. My bed actually.
And, dresser area
Steps.
Open door.
And outside we go.
And around in a circle.
And back inside.
Nice view of our...
And that's my room.
Bree: Our friends came over to celebrate.
Scott: I had to climb up on the wall and move
some dirt. Shovel it in a bag. She was up
on the wall and had a blast.
Alex: It was fun.
Malcolm: She did all the work. We just handed
her cans full of dirt.
Scott: That's right. She stayed up there.
We passed the coffee can of dirt. And she
didn't fall off.
Gary: Good deal.
Scott: It came out fantastic.
Alex: It looks great.
Gary: Well, thank you.
Alex: We honestly expected you to ask us to
help more.
Scott: More, yeah.
Gary: Well, you know, we have 2 more large
projects and that may happen.
Tom: A different experience. We came out here
right after it had rained.
The wall was partially up and had to be rebuilt.
Part of the adventure right?
Gary: It was part of the adventure.
Tom: It was very interesting process.
It is neat to see how it turned out.
You did a really wonderful job.
Gary: Were you injured in the process of making
this?
Tom: I think my lawyer says I'm suppose to
to say "yes".
Gary: Yeah, right, okay.
Bree: And now, the grand total cost for the
building...
Bryson: Really, really awesome. It's phenomenal.
Bree: I wasn't expecting it to be so big.
But, I think my favorite part is the stairs
up.
Bryson: Yeah, that's definitely a favorite.
Bree: And I love the use of the wood. Was
really clever.
Bryson: I like the door.
Shelly: Shae's still got a little longer in
her loft
Gary: Not too long.
Shelly: She loves it.
Shae: I adore it.
It's really funny to watch people walk up
into the loft though because, their like,
"oh, this is nice."
Bang! Ow!
Garen: Don't post that.